

The LOGIC AND AI SEMINAR is very pleased to announce the following
lecture:


                       TRANSITION LOGIC

                        Wolfgang Bibel
                      Professor Emeritus
                     Darmstadt University

                           10:30am
                     Tuesday, October 26
                 Room 2120 (UMIACS Conf Room)
                      A.V. Williams Bldg

ABSTRACT:
The talk addresses the problem of how to integrate into a classical
logical framework transitions which change the knowledge state of
an agent. The transition logic achieves this integration by defining
a deductive relationship |- (T,<=) among formulas for a partially
ordered set (T,<=) of transitions. This novel integration is closer
to human reasoning as experienced in natural language use than
previous approaches to this fundamental problem. It provides a unified
framework for practical reasoning with the potential of a full
exploitation of the maturing techniques from classical deduction and
from special applications such as planning, explanation, diagnosis,
nonmonotonic reasoning, and others.

ARTICLE:   http://www.cs.umd.edu/active/transition.pdf
SLIDES:    http://www.cs.umd.edu/active/TransitionLogic.pdf

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH:
Wolfgang Bibel is currently Professor emeritus for Intellectics at the
Department of Computer Science of the Darmstadt University of Technology
in Germany. He also maintains an affiliation with the University of
British Columbia in Vancouver, Canada, as an Adjunct Professor. Before
moving to Darmstadt in 1988 he was a Professor at the University of
British Columbia in Vancouver and a Fellow of the Canadian Institute for
Advanced Research. Before that he worked as a senior researcher at the
Technical University in Munich and held visiting professorships at
several universities (Rome, Duke, Karlsruhe, Saarbrücken, Wayne State,
et al).

Wolfgang Bibel received his PhD with a thesis in Mathematical Logic in
1968 and his Diploma in Mathematics in 1964 from the Ludwig-Maximilian
University in Munich. His more than 200 publications including several
books cover a variety of topics in Artificial Intelligence/Intellectics
such as automated deduction, architecture of deductive systems,
knowledge representation and inference, planning, learning, program
synthesis, aspects of applications of AI in disciplines like Psychology,
Sociology, Education, and Politics.

Professor Bibel for many years served on more than a dozen boards of
journals and book series, for instance as Section Editor of the
Artificial Intelligence Journal. In the years 1992 through 1998 he
coordinated the national program on Automated Deduction in
Germany. He was heavily involved in the foundation of Artificial
Intelligence research and organization in Germany and Europe.

Dr. Bibel is a fellow of the American Association for Artificial
Intelligence (AAAI) as well as of ECCAI, the European AI organization
which he founded, and received the Donald E. Walker Distinguished
Service Award from IJCAII, the International Joint Conferences for
Artificial Intelligence Inc., among other awards.


