Autonomy, Delegation, and Control:
                     Interacting with Autonomous Agents
                           A workshop at IJCAI-01
              http://csce.uark.edu/~hexmoor/AA01/IJCAI01-cfp.htm
                          Seattle, Washington, USA
                               August, 2001
        ------------------------------------------------------------

Organizers:

Henry Hexmoor(University of Arkansas - AR - USA)
Cristiano Castelfranchi(University of Siena - Italy)
Rino Falcone (National Research Council, Rome, Italy)
Michael Cox(Wright State University) USA


Program committee:

Suzanne Barber (University of Texas) USA
Scott A. DeLoach (Air Force Institute of Technology) USA
Fiorella de Rosis (Bari University) Italy
George Ferguson (University of Rochester) USA
Jean-Michel Hoc (CNRS) France
David Kortenkamp (NASA) Texas - USA
Michael Luck (University of Liverpool) UK
Munindar Singh (North Carolina State University) - USA

Motivation:

If an agent's action selection incorporates nontrivial consideration of
other agents, it can benefit from determination, adjustment, and expression
of (a)  autonomy, (b) delegation, and (c) control.

Recent workshops on these topics have revealed research camps with
differing perspectives on related issues. In human-robot interaction,
robots are clearly considered subservient to humans and the concerns are
mostly with interruptiblity of robots, safety of humans, and the nature of
human guidance. In human-computer interaction, software agents are human
proxies and the concerns are with user-interface and well-behaved agents
with their respect to their human counterparts. In agent-agent interaction,
the agents are designed to change their interaction in order to optimize
local qualities such as cost or a system qualities such as coherence. In
organizational theory, agents are designed to model the organizational
structure and the concerns are mostly with deontic concepts.

We are interested in finding commonalities across research camps. In
particular, one of the aim of the workshop is to establish connections
between the 'adjustable autonomy' approach and the 'mixed initiative'
approach. In fact, we believe that there are quite relevant common issues,
both at the theoretical and at the application level. 'Mixed initiative'
has been mainly focused on HCI, but in fact it has been claimed that it
does not necessarily involve humans (users); it can concern agent-agent
interaction. 'Adjustable autonomy' has been mainly focused on human-robot
interaction, but this is not conceptually necessary; it can concern
human-agent or robot-robot interaction.

Examples of common issues to be modelled are the following.

   * the theory of 'initiative' in interaction, collaboration, and problem
     solving;
   * kinds and levels of initiative and consequent problems of lack of
     control or coordination, and of intrusiveness;
   * the problem of intention recognition (and in general 'mind reading')
     and of shared or non-shared plan for dialogue, collaboration and
     over-helping;
   * the problem of when and how to monitor the other, and on the basis of
     which kind of feedback (inspection, report, ....);
   * the problem of forms of intervention for surveillance, advice,
     assistance, or repair;
   * the problem of coordination and its bases (shared knowledge and plan;
     communication; observation; constraining infrastructures; rules and
     conventions; etc.)
   * the problem of reliance, responsibility and trust;
   * the definition of the level of autonomy of the partners or of
     hierarchical subordination; potential conflicts due to initiative and
     autonomy in collaboration.
   * others.

Those are the topics of our workshop, and they seem definitely common to
HCI (interfaces, dialogue, etc.), human-agent interaction (autonomous
mediating software agents), human-robot interaction, and agent-agent /
robot-robot interaction. Some of those issues are also important in the
organization theory.

Workshop:

We are seeking papers that clearly exemplify central notions in a research
camp or try to synthesize unified views. We plan to have both panels and
brief presentations by participants in order to motivate discussion and
promote cross-fertilization. To encourage interaction and a broad exchange
of ideas, the workshop will be limited to 40 participants and ample time
will be allotted for general discussion. Attendance is limited to active
participants only. Workshop attendees must register for the main IJCAI
conference.

Submission:

If you intend to participate or intend to submit a paper, send an email by
February 15, 2000. We ask authors to submit an extended abstract (3-4
pages) or a full paper of up to 8 pages by February 28, 2001. Decisions
about submissions and an agenda will be announced on March 31, 2001.
Camera-ready version of papers and abstracts must be submitted by April 20,
2001. Manuscripts are expected to be in English (with American spelling
preferred). Our first preference is HTML files. Otherwise, we prefer the
following formats: MS word, PDF, postscript. If we receive adequate number
of quality papers will seek to publish them as a collection.

Participation:

We will try to accommodate all who wish to participate. However, to keep
the workshop size small, we will give priority to those who submit papers
or abstracts.



Correspondence:
