                              Call for Papers

        8th Workshop on Logic, Language, Information and Computation
                              (WoLLIC'2001)
                          July 31 to August 3, 2001
 
           Scientific Co-Sponsorship: IGPL, FoLLI, ASL, SBC, SBL

                            Bras<ED>lia, Brazil

                      (NEW!: (MODEST) STUDENT GRANTS)

THE EVENT
  The "8th Workshop on Logic, Language, Information and Computation"
  (WoLLIC'2001), the eighth version of a series of workshops which started
  in 1994 with the aim of fostering interdisciplinary research in pure and
  applied logic, will be held in Bras<ED>lia, Brazil, from July 31st to
  August 3rd 2001.

SCOPE
  Contributions are invited in the form of short papers (10 A4 10pt pages) in
  all areas related to logic, language, information and computation, including:
  pure logical systems, proof theory, model theory, algebraic logic, type
  theory, category theory, constructive mathematics, lambda and combinatorial
  calculi, program logic and program semantics, logics and models of
  concurrency, logic and complexity theory, nonclassical logics, nonmonotonic
  logic, logic and language, discourse representation, logic and artificial
  intelligence, automated deduction, foundations of logic programming,
  logic and computation, and logic engineering.

SCIENTIFIC SPONSORSHIP
  The 8th WoLLIC'2001 has the scientific sponsorship of the Association
  for Symbolic Logic (ASL), the Interest Group in Pure and Applied Logics
  (IGPL), the European Association for Logic, Language and Information (FoLLI),
  the Sociedade Brasileira de Computa<E7><E3>o (SBC), and the Sociedade
  Brasileira de L<F3>gica (SBL).

THE LOCATION
  Bras<ED>lia, the youthful capital of Brazil - famous for its innovating
  architecture and futuristic urbanism, is situated in the geographical
  center of the country, inside the Brazilian Cerrados that is a rich
  Tropical Savannah, with a unique and diverse flora and fauna. In August,
  during the Brazilian winter, the weather is dry with an average
  temperature of 22 C, that makes ideal aquatic sports and visits to the
  natural attractions of the city as the Zoo, the Botanical Garden and the
  National Park.

GUEST SPEAKERS
  There will be a number of guest speakers, including:
  Walter Carnielli (State Univ Campinas, Brazil)
  Bruno Courcelle (Univ Bordeaux 1, France)
  Gilles Dowek (INRIA, France)
  Petr Hajek (Inst Computer Sci, Czech Acad of Sciences, Czech Republic)
  Dexter Kozen (Cornell Univ, USA) (TO BE CONFIRMED)
  Jouko V<E4><E4>n<E4>nen (Helsinki Univ, Finland)

SUBMISSION
  Papers (up to 10 pages A4 10pt, sent preferably in postscript format by
  e-mail to wollic@cin.ufpe.br, or in 5(five) copies to postal address) must
  be RECEIVED by APRIL 2nd, 2001 by one of the Chairs of the Organising
  Committee.
  Papers must be ANONYMOUS (a separate identification page must be included),
  written in English and give enough detail to allow the programme committee
 to assess the merits of the work.  Papers should start with a brief
  statement of the issues, a summary of the main results, and a statement
  of their significance and relevance to the workshop. References and
  comparisons with related work is also expected.  Technical development
  directed to the specialist should follow.  Results must be unpublished
  and not submitted for publication elsewhere, including the proceedings
  of other symposia or workshops. One author of each accepted paper will be
  expected to attend the conference in order to present it. Authors will be
  notified of acceptance by MAY 7th, 2001, and final versions will have
  to be delivered (in LaTeX format) by MAY 31st, 2001.  The abstracts of
  the papers will be published in a "Conference Report" section of the
  Logic Journal of the IGPL (ISSN 1367-0751) (Oxford Univ Press) as part
  of the meeting report.  Papers presented at the meeting will be invited for
  submission (in full version) to the Logic Journal of the IGPL
  (http://www.oup.co.uk/igpl/).

STUDENT GRANTS
  WoLLIC'2001 will make available modest grants to graduate students in logic
  and to recent PhDs so that they may attend the meeting in Bras<ED>lia.
  To be considered for a grant, please (1) send a letter of application, and
  (2) ask your thesis supervisor to send a brief recommendation letter.
  The application letter should be brief (one page) and should include
  (1) your name, (2) your home institution, (3) your thesis supervisor's name,
  (4) a one-paragraph description of your studies and work in logic,
  (5) your estimate of the travel expenses you will incur,
  (6) (for citizens or residents of Brazil) citizenship or visa status, and
  (7) (voluntary) indication of your gender and minority status. Only modest
  grants will be possible, partially covering travel costs and perhaps some of
  the living expenses during the meeting. Women and members of minority groups
  are strongly encouraged to apply. In addition to funds provided by WoLLIC,
  it is expected that this program of student grants will be supported by a
  grant from the Brazilian National Council for the Scientific and
  Technological Development (CNPq); CNPq funds may be awarded only to
  students at Brazilian universities and to citizens and permanent residents
  of Brazil. Application by email is encouraged; put "WoLLIC grant application"
  in the subject line of your message. Applications and recommendations should
  be received before the deadline of MARCH 1st, 2001, by one of the Co-Chairs
  of the Organising Committee.

IMPORTANT DATES
  Submission: APRIl 2nd, 2001
  Notification of acceptance/rejection: MAY 7th, 2001
  Delivery of final (in LaTeX): MAY 31st, 2001

PROGRAMME COMMITTEE
  John Baldwin (Univ Illinois at Chicago, USA)
  Mads Dam (Swedish Inst Computer Sci, Sweden)
  Marcelo Finger (Univ Sao Paulo, Brazil)
  Edward Hermann Haeusler (Pont Cathol Univ Rio de Janeiro, Brazil)
  David Israel (SRI International, USA)
  Fairouz Kamareddine (Heriot-Watt Univ, Scotland)
  Claude Kirchner (LORIA & INRIA, France)
  Phokion Kolaitis (Univ Calif at Santa Cruz, USA)
  Daniel Leivant (Indiana Univ, USA)
  Michael Moortgat (Utrecht Univ, The Netherlands)
  Pavel Pudl<E1>k (Maths Inst, Czech Acad. of Sciences, Czech Rep)

ORGANISING COMMITTEE
  Mauricio Ayala-Rincon (UnB) (Co-Chair)
  Sandra A. de Amo (UFU)
  Ana Teresa de Castro Martins (UFC)
  Anjolina G. de Oliveira (UFPE/UFBA)
  Hayd<E9>e W. Poubel (UnB)
  Ruy de Queiroz (UFPE) (Co-Chair)
  Renata Wassermann (USP)

FURTHER INFORMATION
  Contact one of the Co-Chairs of the Organising Committee:
  Ruy de Queiroz, Centro de Inform<E1>tica, Univ. Federal de Pernambuco,
  CP 7851, 50732-970 Recife, PE, Brazil. E-mail: ruy@cin.ufpe.br,
  tel.: (+55 81) 3271-8430, fax: (+55 81) 3271-8438.
  Mauricio Ayala Rincon, Departamento de Matem<E1>tica,
  Universidade de Bras<ED>lia, 70910-900 Bras<ED>lia, DF, Brazil.
  E-mail: ayala@mat.unb.br, tel.: (+55 61) 307-2441, fax: (+55 61) 273-2737.

WEB PAGE
  http://www.cin.ufpe.br/~wollic/wollic2001/
