CAP@OSU

                         Oregon State University, January 18th - 20th

                                   CAP@CMU

                         Carnegie Mellon University, August 9th- 11th

                   The Computing and Philosophy conference has become the
                   central meeting place for all aspects of computing and philosophy.
                   This year CAP begins to hold both East Coast and West Coast
                   meetings. Each meeting will also correspond to the Northern
                   hemisphere's Winter and Summer seasons. The inaugural session
                   of the West Coast meeting will be held at Oregon State Universty
                   and the East Coast meeting will be a Carnegie Mellon.

                   This year CAP also announces the CAP Awards Program.
                   Interested parties should consult the Awards page for more
                   information.

                   As with all CAP conferences, speakers and panels will address
                   many aspects of the "computational turn" that is occurring within
                   the discipline of Philosophy. Featured topics include AI and
                   Epistemology, new models of Logic Software, Computer Ethics,
                   Computing and World Cultures, Electronic Resources, and the
                   Impact of Distance Learning on the Profession. 

                   In addition to invited participants, the Program Committees
                   welcome proposals dealing with, but not restricted to:

                       The use of computers in the teaching of philosophy. This
                       may include their use in symbolic and informal logic as
                       well as in the teaching of other courses in philosophy.
                       Pedagogically rich and/or advanced uses of educational
                       computing will receive priority in the selection process.

                       The use of computers as research tools in philosophy. This
                       may include any substantive use of computers in areas
                       such as electronic texts and communications as well as
                       topics in logic, the philosophy of language or the
                       philosophy of mind. 

                       The philosophical aspects of artificial intelligence. This
                       may include current theories and methods as well as
                       relevant areas of the philosophy of science.

                       The area of computer ethics. This may include ethical
                       issues regarding privacy, ownership of intellectual
                       property, professional responsibility, access and
                       distributive justice, anonymous communication,
                       democracy and the electronic citizen, human values and
                       human rights, globalization and ethical relativism, or other
                       ethics topics related to information technology.

                   The conference format strongly discourages mere 'paper reading.'
                   Speakers are urged to use computer-based or generated
                   presentation materials wherever appropriate.

                   The deadline for submissions to the Western Division meeting is
                   Wednesday, November 29th. The deadline for submissions to
                   the Eastern Division meeting is Monday, February 19th.
                   Proposals for presentations should consist of a 2-3 paragraph
                   abstract (URLs pointing to fuller descriptions and/or examples
                   can be included in the abstract). 

